---
layout: page
title: "Introduction"
course: "dlprograms"
unit: 6
---
Where the technology department falls on the organizational chart varies significantly from district to district and between organizations. In some school districts, IT falls under the purview of the Chief Academic Officer. In others, it falls under the purview of the Chief Operations Officer, as IT is increasingly a core operation the same as finance or HR or facilities. Some districts split up the instructional and technical teams between Curriculum and Operations. In other districts (and in the ideal scenario), IT would fall directly under the Superintendent as it's a core service that is unique within the organization. But in corporate America, and more than a few school districts, IT falls under the finance department. This is partially because the core IT systems that run an organization's financial and HR systems are critical to and organization's mission continuity, partially because IT and finance are the biggest risks in an organization, partially because in the corporate world IT is an overhead/administrative cost that doesn't generate profit, and really because IT is a lot about spending money.

IT is third on an organization's list of administrative expenses, coming in behind personnel and facilities. The management of IT expenses is a critical component of a CTO's job, possibly the *most* critical - as having a successful IT operation depends on having things. The IT expenditures that will be advocated for will depend a lot on where IT falls within the organizational chart. IT aligned under the Chief Academic Officer likely spends more on curriculum materials, where IT under an Operations officer likely spends more on infrastructure of school security. A CTO must both advocate for the funds that they need to create a successful technology program, while being a good steward of large sums of money. Even a small school district in North Carolina will spend over a million dollars on technology services each year. The CTO is responsible for ensuring that these funds are used appropriately, and must take care to avoid waste, fraud, and abuse. 

## Expense Types
In any organization, there are three major categories of expenditures: current expense, capital expenses, and grant funding. 

### Current Expenses
Current expenses are the day-to-day cost of keeping a school or business operational, including utility costs, personnel costs, supplies, computer software, small equipment purchases, subscriptions, services, etc. 

Specific to technology, current expenses include staffing and personnel for the technology department, Internet connectivity, printer ink and paper, software subscriptions, technical support licenses, and computer peripheral purchases (keyboards, mouses, etc). 

### Capital Expenses
Capital expenditures are large purchases of assets that are expected to last multiple years, like land, school buildings, furniture, busses, as well as computer and network hardware. Historically, a capital expenditure was arbitrarily considered something that has a value of $5,000 or greater, though as computers have gotten cheaper, they've continued to be considered capital expenses. These assets are called _fixed assets_, which is a business term that means that the asset is not "expected to be consumed or converted into cash within a year". The maintenance of fixed assets, such as building maintenance supplies, and repair parts for busses and IT equipment are also typically considered capital expenses. Because fixed assets are real property held by a school district, a school district's books must account for fixed assets in their ledgers (hence the reason that many schools or organizations place fixed asset tags on devices and keep an inventory through the finance department). Because most of these assets will lose value over time, the finance department will reduce the value over the expected lifespan of a computer in their ledgers. This process is called _depreciation_. For example, a computer may have a usable lifespan of 4 years. Therefore, the district will carry the full value of the computer on their property ledger for the first year, and typically reduce that amount by 25% per year until the item has no value at the end of the 4th year. In the event the computer doesn't last four years and has to be retired early, the finance department writes the remaining value of that computer off as a loss. This has tax implications for non-governmental entities, since they can write these losses off on their taxes. Land does not depreciate in value and a building may actually appreciate over time, and districts will reflect these changes on their books as well. 

For CTOs, capital expenditures include computers, network switches and wifi access points, wiring (and the labor for wiring), datacenters, air conditioning for server rooms, etc.

### Grant Funding
A grant is money given by a government or organization to serve a specific purpose or complete a specific task. Grants typically are issued either by the Federal Government or Philanthropic Organizations come in different flavors:
* **Competitive Grants** are what we typically think about when we hear the word "grant". Competitive are grants where an organization (university, non-profit, company, school district, etc.) applies to receive grant funds to complete a specific project in response to a "call for proposals" where a granting organization states their priorities and goals for the funding. A certain number of grants are awarded based on the merits of the proposed project.
* **Discretionary Grants** are the complete opposite of competitive grants. Money is given to an organization with no rules, strings, or purpose - the organization is free to use these funds as they choose.
* **Directed Grants** are issued to organizations to complete a specific project. This is basically the equivalent of a "work for hire" type agreement and is typically where a government will provide funds to a University or Organization to complete a project that the government entity wants completed (evaluate a program, run an initiative, etc.). 
* **Formula Grants** are issued as a  at a calculated amount to serve a certain student population or group. Title I funds, CTE funds, and EC funds are all examples of formula grants. The grant funding amount depends on a number of factors (i.e., in the case of Title I, the percentage of students in poverty). Formula grants require specific budgets, have specific requirements, and are closely monitored.
* **Block Grants** are issued to states or organizations. Block grants are for a specific program or purpose, but organizations typically have wide latitude in what that funding is typically used for.

Grant funds are typically the most restrictive types of funding, as funding must typically be used to complete a specific set of goals or be directed to serve a specific function. Grant funds usually also come with the strictest oversight. While there is still significant oversight and monitoring with block grants, especially with Federal grants, districts have much more leeway with block grants. Competitive grants and formula grants typically require a strict budget and deviation typically requires pre-approval.

Grants can typically be used for either current expense or capital purchases, though different grantmakers may prescribe what is and is not an eligible expense (for example, many grants do not allow personnel costs to be charged to grants). 
